hey this is presh tole Walker I want to
thank my painter for emailing me this
problem which comes from a 1957 math
class a man is standing due east of a
tower and notes it subtends an angle of
45 degrees with the tower he walks south
forty-two point four feet and the
subtended angle is 30 degrees how tall
is the tower
note the subtended angle is from the
ground to the top of the tower remember
this problem is from 1957 so you can
only use pencil and paper no calculators
are allowed but you can refer to
whatever was commonly available in 1957
like trig tables slide rules etc can you
figure it out give this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching the
video for a solution so what's so
amazing about this problem is the man
can estimate the towers height without
knowing the distance to the base of the
tower this is useful if the towers base
is inaccessible say because the tower is
protected by wall or surrounded by a
moat and all we need is a little
geometry in particular we'll use some
properties of right triangles will use
the 45-45-90 isosceles right triangle in
this case both of the legs have the same
length we'll also use the 30-60-90 right
triangle in this case if the leg
opposite 30 degrees is why the leg
opposite 60 degrees will be y times the
square root of 3 finally we'll use the
Pythagorean theorem if we have a right
triangle with legs of a and B then its
hypotenuse will be the square root of
the quantity a squared plus B squared so
the man is standing east of the tower
and he subtends a 45 degree angle with
the tower so we'll assume that the tower
is perpendicular to the ground and we
an angle of 45 degrees from the man this
creates an isosceles right triangle a
45-45-90 right triangle so if the towers
height is H we can then use the property
of this right triangle to get that the
other leg of the tower will also be H so
the distance from the man to the tower
is also the same length as the height of
the tower now the man walks south
forty-two point four feet so we'll
visualize this the man is walking south
this will be at a right angle so we end
up with another right triangle we know
that one leg is H because that's the
distance from before then the other leg
will be forty two point four feet
because that's the distance the man
walked so we can then calculate the
distance from the man to the tower using
the Pythagorean theorem so the distance
from the man to the tower will be the
square root of H squared plus forty two
point four squared
we finally have one more right triangle
to consider from this position the
subtended angle to the tower is thirty
degrees so this creates a one more right
triangle the subtended angle is 30
degrees so the other angle is 60 degrees
so we have a 30-60-90 right triangle so
let me just rotate this diagram so it's
a little easier to see
we know that the leg opposite 30 degrees
is H and the leg opposite 60 degrees is
the square root of the quantity H
squared plus 42.4 squared so how tall is
the tower
well we can use the property of the
30-60-90 right triangle that the leg
opposite 30 degrees if that length is Y
then the leg opposite 60 degrees is
square root of 3 times that from our
diagram we end up with the Equality that
the square root of H squared plus 42
point
four squared will be equal to H times
the square root of three
we then square both sides of the
equation then we collect the H square
terms and then we solve for this
equation knowing that the height has to
be a positive quantity we end up that
the height of the tower is equal to 20
1.2 times the square root 2 which is
approximately twenty nine point nine
eight feet and we figured out how tall
the tower is did you figure it out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math you can catch me on my blog mind
your decisions if you like this video
you can check out my books which are
listed in the video description and you
can support me on patreon if you have a
math topic you can email me fresh at
mind your decisions calm and you can
catch me on social media either at mind
your decisions or a pressure tell Walker